.TH ABC2ABC 1 "7 March 2004"
.SH NAME
abc2abc \- a simple abc checker/re-formatter/transposer
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBabc2abc\fP \fIfile\fP [ \fB-s\fP ] [ \fB-n\fP ] [ \fB-b\fP ]
[ \fB-r\fP ] [ \fB-e\fP ] [ \fB-t \fP\fIsemitones\fP ] [ \fB-u\fP ]
[ \fB-d\fP ] [ \fB-v\fP ]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
.B abc2abc
is a simple abc checker/re-formatter/transposer.
It will check whether the \fIfile\fP given on the command line
obeys basic abc syntax.
.PP
If you want to check an abc tune,
it is recommended that you use
.B abc2midi
with the \fB-c\fP option.
This performs extra checks that
.B abc2abc
does not do.
.PP
The output of
.B abc2abc
goes to standard output.
Use redirection to save it to a file.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-s
Rework spacing in the file (which affects how notes are beamed together
when the music is printed out). This option does not appear to be working
correctly.
.TP
.BI \-n " X"
Reformats the abc file with line breaks every \fIX\fP bars.
.TP
.B \-b
Don't do bar checking.
.TP
.B \-r
Don't do repeat checking.
.TP
.B \-e
Don't report errors.
.TP
.BI \-t " semitones"
Transpose tune by \fIsemitones\fP semitones
.TP
.B \-u
Update notation; the older notation \fB+ +\fP for chords is replaced by 
\fB[]\fP and \fBs s\fP for slurs is replaced by \fB()\fP.
.TP
.B \-d
Re-notate the tune with all note lengths doubled. The unit length specified by the L: field
command is halved (e.g. L:1/8 to L:1/16).
.TP
.B \-v
Re-notate the tune with all note lengths halved. The unit length specified by the L: field
command is doubled (e.g. L:1/8 to L:1/4).
.TP
.BI \-V " X"
For multivoiced abc files (i.e. contains V: field commands), only voice \fIX\fP is copied.
.TP
.BI \-X " n"
For a file containing many tunes, the X: reference numbers are renumbered sequentially
starting from number \fIn\fP.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR abcmtex "(1), " abc2midi "(1), " midi2abc "(1), " mftext "(1)"
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Anselm Lingnau <lingnau@tm.informatik.uni-frankfurt.de> and is now supported by Seymour Shlien <seymour.shlien@crc.ca>
for the GNU/Linux system.
.SH VERSION
This man page describes abc2abc version 1.26 from March 07 2004.
